[Music]
i was in central park we were just
finished seeing one of the shakespeare
in the park performances and it
arraigned a little earlier so there were
puddles in some of the walkways i saw a
woman
walking with her kid the kid has
galoshes on and a raincoat on and
they're coming down the walkway
and there's this big juicy muddy puddle
right there
and
i said
please let the kid jump in the puddle
you know the kid wants to jump in the
puddle the kid is like three or four you
know the kid and what is what does the
mother do
he pulls the kid around to prevent that
from happening that's an experiment in
cratering that's what craters happen
that way you splash the water there's
mud it's fun you get to see the cause
and effect
of a force downward force operating on a
on a fluid
gone
that was a bit of curiosity in that
moment that was extinguished
[Music]
hey everyone welcome to impact theory
today's guest is arguably one of the
most important scientific voices of our
time a harvard and columbia educated
doctor of astrophysics with an
impressive string of best-selling books
under his belt he's been instrumental in
creating some of the most influential
works of popular science the world has
ever known from his funny and
informative show star talk which in its
very first year on tv was nominated for
an emmy for best informational
programming to being the executive
editor and on-camera host of the
groundbreaking television series cosmos
which garnered four emmys a peabody
award two critics choice awards was
translated into 45 languages ran in 181
countries and has been viewed by over
750 million people helping to inspire
entire generations of budding scientists
the world over his rare ability to spark
curiosity and guide public scientific
discourse has not only made him one of
the most sought after public
intellectuals but has seen him amass a
staggering list of accolades including
more than 20 honorary doctorates nasa
bestowed upon him their distinguished
public service medal the international
astronomical union recognized his
contributions by naming an asteroid
after him he's had multiple presidential
appointments was made a research
associate of the department of
astrophysics at the american museum of
natural history and was named as the
fifth head of the world renowned hayden
planetarium in new york city as well as
their first ever occupant of the
frederick p rose directorship
so please
help me in welcoming the man people
magazine named the sexiest
astrophysicist alive the author of
letters from an astrophysicist the
legendary dr neil degrasse tyson
[Music]
[Applause]
how you doing man all right thank you
man my pleasure thank you for being on
the show what an introduction you gave
me there but i need to clarify something
first of all um the the people magazine
distinction
uh
sexy's astrophysicist that was first 50
pounds ago okay just make that clear uh
second i i don't think that's one of the
more competitive categories that they
have in there
i will say
that you there's just now more sexy on
the astrophysicist and that whether it's
a big category or not you're a very
distinguished uh i don't know how i beat
out you know at the time you know
stephen hawking you know i don't know i
i don't know what victory
but that year i think that was the only
year this was back in 2000 i think it
was the only year they actually had that
category they have these fun categories
that they throw in just for for for
entertainment purposes but they're the
recurring categories like uh sexiest
action hero right sexiest uh athletes
sexiest actors so those are
those are really competitive categories
and my year the cover
whose transcends all categories was brad
pitt and he was a sexiest man alive
beyond category so there you go
literally the epitome of uh sex symbols
back in the day for sure right right so
you were in good company that's good
i want to start so the book is great by
the way and i really enjoyed it it's a
wonderful pick and mix as they call it
in the uk of different topics where
you're diving in sometimes very quickly
and then other times much more prolonged
yeah depending on the on the subject and
or
or depending on how much i knew about
about the subject brought to me that i
could then comment on equally fair yeah
one of the ones that really hit me was
you talking about your dad you called it
a eulogy of sorts and you went through
some of the things that he did which i
actually i didn't know anything about
your dad before reading that what was it
about your dad that impacted you so much
that you still carry today
so it's not so much oh he's my dad i
love my dad that's all true
but
at the end of the day what matters is
for who and what you become in life
for me at least was
what level of wisdom
did he glean in his life and then
successfully communicate to me either by
example or by just explicit statement
and that combination of those two
means of delivery had some important uh
impacts impact
see what i did there
impacts on my life
just for example and i gave these
examples in that
that that eulogy was a letter to him
during the memorial service he died a
couple of years ago at age 89 so not a
tragic
death but you still miss someone even
though you know they're ready to check
out
and i'll just give one example if i may
in high school
he
was in gym class and they were lining up
and they were about to enter the next
athletic unit and it was track and field
and the gym instructor pointed to my
father online and said
cyril tyson everyone look at him he does
not have the body type that would excel
in track
and they used him as an example and he
says
what no one is going to tell me what i
can't do
in my life
and he used that as a reason to start
running
and he started track in that moment i
mean at that exact moment he decided
that his one of his next
tasks in life would be to take up
running and
excel at it
within a few years of that he became
world class
at one time had the fifth fastest time
in the world in the middle distance they
don't run this anymore 600 yard run
and
he
in 1948
the olympics was not yet ready to come
back
to us because we're still reeling
roiling from the second world war
instead there was still an olympics it
was called the gi olympics and it was
held
in hitler's stadium
so he competed in hitler's stadium
uh in the late 1940s and just one of the
great memories of his life but reason
i'm saying all of that is there's a
friend of his name johnny johnson
who
they were competing against the new york
athletic club in the day
it mattered that you had amateur status
no one's thinking of that anymore but
back then you couldn't compete in the
olympics if you were professional at all
and there's a whole so professional
esteemed sort of you were tainted in
some way
and it's hard to think that that used to
be how people thought but that's how it
was
uh in the day
once you graduated college you needed
some sanctioning body
to compete with
so there are athletic clubs the new york
athletic club at the time accepted only
white protestants
so there's another club called the
pioneer club
which took everybody who was not
accepted to the new york athletic club
which was basically blacks and jews
is really what that came down to
and some catholics but basically blacks
and jews so he competed alongside jewish
athletes
so there they are competing against the
new york athletic club and his best
friend johnny johnson okay
was coming around the back stretch
might have been the quarter mile coming
on the final straightaway
and a runner from the new york athletic
club is a few paces behind him and
johnny johnson overhears that runner's
coach
say
catch that
and he overheard this
and so what did he say to himself
he said
this is one he ain't going to
catch
that extended his his his lead to the
finish line and he tells this story
not
with any bitter tone as you might think
any story like that today would
certainly be
um
told with with great remorse and
consternation
so he never had that kind of tone when
he shared those stories with us
it was
here's an occasion to parlay
what today might be called a
microaggression into
a reason to excel
even more than you
had expected of your own abilities and
talents
and so i have taken that lesson with me
he was just telling a story he didn't
say let me give my kids a lesson today
no these are just things that happened
in his life
and
in my sort of letter to him in death
i recount for the audience several of
these examples and that among them
yeah that story is really powerful to me
and in the book you you frame much of
your own success is
you know i especially when i was
starting the
the system of certainly astrophysics
didn't exactly open its arms wide to me
nasa was born the same year i was born
and there was not a welcoming of people
of my color and so
in some ways the the amount that i've
overshot average is a result of having
to push back against that friction but
again there's no bitterness in your
voice so how did you make that a
positive thing in your life yeah i think
dare i even suggest that it's possible
to draw a line in the sand
between transgressions be they racial
cultural
religious i mean
we live in a very fractured world today
i don't know if it's the most fractured
ever
but
i mean the first world war second that
would those were fractured times
so i don't want to claim uniqueness in
how fractured we are but what is clear
is that the internet
has enabled in social media have enabled
people to tribalize
you might go your whole life without
ever finding another person who thinks
the earth is flat
you go online and you see them all and
they have conventions and they
and they meet here even if it's only
virtual so so you have ways to
say why you are different from other
people
and i don't know that that's always a
healthy
place to be
in a pluralistic land you want to
celebrate differences
rather than
go out of your way to establish
differences and then claim one group is
better than another it is the very motto
of the united states
out of many one the pluribus pluribus
unum you can carry that forward to
to
immigration and the ethnicity the the
melting pot of ethnicity that was the
goal or at least the vision for what we
thought a future america would be and i
don't feel it heading that way now so so
but you can draw a line in the sand
between people who transgress
but do not hold power over you
from those who transgress and do
so the coach who said catch that
he doesn't have power
over johnny johnson unless you allow him
to this is a famous quote from martin
luther king
you can only be ridden if your back is
bent and so
in the earlier days not only when i was
less known but just the racial climate
was different
yellow taxis in new york city would not
pick me up if i was going
uptown in the direction where harlem is
whether or not i was had intended to get
out before then
this wouldn't pick me up i'd have to
switch sides of the street
pretend i'm going downtown
then they pick me up and then i say
please go up to this so i'd have to pay
an extra
50 cents for that turnaround but that
taxi driver whatever is their bias
was not between me and my goal in
becoming an astrophysicist so
i apportioned my emotional reactions to
where it actually mattered for my life's
trajectory a lot of people when they hit
adversity they're broken by it and
whether that's just it's hard to get
good at something or it's something like
that where it's prejudice sort of
nakedly
it stops them and they never overcome
that and and you've said and this is so
interesting and exciting to me
especially in today's world
that that worked almost like a
gravitational slingshot that threw you
farther so how do people capture that
energy i see what you did there the
slingshot is very good
so the slingshot in case
everyone doesn't know so what happens is
all the planets go in the same direction
around the sun
because we're all formed in a disk that
rotated a gaseous disk and the planets
condense out of that so they
everybody's moving the same direction
from the top it's counterclockwise the
top
so
if you launch a spacecraft and don't
have enough fuel to go the distance that
you want
what you can do is you can come in
behind a planet and fall towards it
and the act of falling towards it is its
gravity pulls you in that's fine
but the act of getting pulled in you
actually gain the speed of the orbit of
the planet as well
so
falling into the gravity you now have to
exit the other side that will eat the
speed that you gained by falling in
because of its gravity because that's
symmetric but that entire process
you gain the orbital speed of the planet
coming out the other side it's called a
gravitational assist
and you can do like a multi-cushion pool
shot in the solar system to get enough
energy to reach pluto or beyond and
almost all of our spacecraft that went
into the distant solar system rather
than giving huge rockets which are
expensive to get it there you use a
smaller rocket and you just
what you're doing is you're stealing
orbital energy from other planets which
is they don't miss it they'll be fine
unless you did it like all the time then
they'll
they'll you can mess them up but
jupiter versus our spacecraft jupiter
doesn't care
so i just want to explain the orbital
assist in case others didn't know so yes
these these microaggressions are
converted to
enthusiasm to excel
and
dare i say something that i think today
many people are thinking older folks are
thinking but they're not speaking
i'm going to say it
when i grew up
probably older than you it was very
common to hear the phrase
sticks and stones can break my bones but
words will never hurt me
you recited this this is what you told
when you came home when you said oh you
know this bully called me a name or it
sticks and stones can break my bone but
words will never hurt me
and so
this was an inoculation against
hate speech really
against just evil people just nasty
people
you ever develop a set a system of
defenses
against unpleasant people out there
and
i haven't heard that phrase in a long
time i don't hear it recited
in the elementary schools
what i think has happened over the years
is we came to learn as a civilization
that words can be hurtful
and words can
sort of
change your mood or set you into a
depression they and so i don't have a
problem with that that's this is at an
enlightened new place to understand the
role of our emotional state and how it
interacts with our world around us
that's an advance in
in mental health
what i see on the flip side of that coin
however is people are less
able
to deal with the very same people who
are around today who were around back
then who are calling you names the
people who might be
bullying you on the internet by saying
things about you we i don't know that we
have how to defend against that now
other than seeing a counselor
for your emotional state i can say from
the era in which i grew up i don't give
a rat's ass what you say to me okay
um unless you are between me and some
goal then i have i'll have to navigate
that some way
if there's a racist person or a sexist
person or a person with some kind of
cultural bias
i want to know that actually i don't
want them to hide that i want you to say
everything you want to say
then i'll say okay that's who you are
that's how you're thinking
so now what do i need to do
because you're in my way do i dig under
you go around you
leap over you or do i go this way and
then come out the other side yeah it's
longer it's more effort
it's more energy
yeah
but on some level it's sort of the same
different day
so as they say that which doesn't kill
you makes you stronger
you just hope you don't get killed okay
that's
so
i hear in all this an echo of the notion
that your dad gave you which was so
powerful for me when i read it which is
it's not enough to be right you have to
be effective oh yeah
he worked for city government in new
york city during the civil rights
movement
and if i just add one thing to that
the press doesn't write about stories
that don't happen
understandably
but i just want to say that he at the
time the 1960s
mid 60s to the late 60s arguably the
most turbulent
set of years
on american soil in american history
since the civil war itself a century
earlier with the assassinated leaders
and the campus unrest and the inner
cities were burning the ghettos as they
were known as the time and what is what
is a riot
if not the very last
act of desperation because you are left
without any hope at all
that is what a riot
is
and so watts burned and
washington burned and chicago burned
federal troops brought in
1968 after martin luther king was shot
new york
city silent
just some skirmishes here and there
nothing
so
no one writes a story about that
my father was active he was a
commissioner in new york city
in the human resources administration
human resources this is human capital
being nurtured and
established in such a way that you feel
some sense of meaning and importance in
your life because you have a job waiting
for you after you get out of school
there wasn't any lost hope there there
was still some hope
and so he was behind the scenes on that
and he just knew
that in the
most turbulent year of the most
turbulent decades since the 1860s
the most populous city
with the largest
ghetto
in the country
did not burn and so
you can be right and say i have this
plan let's just do this if you can't
implement it
you're just talking
you just you just
you
you can say things that sound nice
and people can cheer you on but if you
don't have a strategy to make it happen
a path that's why i went i did my hand
gestures there's somebody in my way and
i want to get there
i can't just say let me you got to let
me through
i have a good idea no that's not good
enough
i can't say you're being racist you're
being that's not
you got to navigate it i think high
school
that's where you learn how to deal with
difficult people
there's not a single high school movie
that doesn't show the angst
of the cliques that have formed and what
the relationships are that they have
to one another it's this microcosm of
real stuff that goes on in the real
world there are beautiful people and
they will get jobs you're not gonna get
okay there are people who are nasty
you're gonna have to navigate them there
are people who you cannot interact with
for whatever reason or another they're
gonna be in the cubicle next to you in
your workplace
so i think we undervalue the total
social pot
that
people are tossed into in their high
school experience
they want to say oh i could have learned
more but i had to deal with all these
people hey having to deal with all these
people is now in your portfolio for when
you're in the workplace you've got it
and research continually shows that the
people who ascend to manager level and
beyond they know how to interact with
have high social uh
eq
emotional quotient
as somebody who has achieved
astronomically grand heights because
they have an ability to
almost translate like take things from
the scientific world and make it
accessible or navigate you know finding
that path when somebody's trying to
stand in your way for whatever reason do
you have strategies specifically that
you're like consciously aware of using
and if so what are they communicating
yeah when you're communicating or when
you're looking for a path oh yeah well
so first of all just to be clear i i
don't know that i totally fit
the the philosophy of this show
and i've seen many of your shows not all
of them but many
and what's driving the conversations
and your motivation for the guests that
you have in this couch
is
that they
they had some vision statement
and they
and they have grit
okay they got knocked down they stood
back up they tried another way they got
knocked down again then they were
successful either measured by wealth or
influence or or just joy in their life's
passions for me what i do for the public
is prime almost 80 plus percent of it is
driven by
duty
not by
ambition what gives you the sense of
duty because i can do something
and if i can do it better than others
and it's for a greater good in society i
would be irresponsible
if i did not
that's how i view it so when i get
requests
to either advise in the science on a
movie artist calling i say well my
expertise is not unique in what it is
you need here seven are the people you
should get them
i'm not seeking this visibility if
someone says well we need this for this
reason and we came to you for that
reason i said yeah i think i can make a
unique stamp on what it is you're doing
i will agree to do that
because if i didn't
then the product would not be as good as
i know i could have helped it become and
so i'd be irresponsible if that were the
case this is how i ended up hosting
cosmos in 2014 and drillian the widow of
carl sagan who was hugely talented
and a little bit in his shadow over his
years but she co-wrote the original
cosmos in 1980 co-wrote it and
was co-writer of the cosmos that i was
the host of in 2014 she's one of the
most enlightened people i've ever met
okay she approached me and said
uh
would you consider hosting cosmos i said
i don't
there's a dozen people maybe half dozen
others who would jump at this
opportunity i don't need to do this i
really don't i have books i want to
write this sort of thing i don't i don't
need to be a tv star then i thought
about it and i said well i met carl
sagan when i was 17. i was applying to
colleges he was at cornell i had been
accepted to cornell but was didn't know
what college i wanted to go to and
the admissions office saw that i wasn't
totally in the moment there they for i
didn't know this they had forwarded my
application to him
for his reaction i was already deep in
the universe since i was nine and he
sent me a letter
he doesn't know me from adam i'm a 17
year old kid from the bronx he's a
professor of astronomy at cornell
university and i get this letter and i
open and says i understand you like the
same stuff i like
do you want to come visit the campus to
help you decide if you want to go to
cornell
it was like whoa this is now he hadn't
done cosmos yet that's how old i am but
he was already famous he had been on the
tonight show and you know and had
best-selling books
so i took him up on it
i took a bus up to ithaca new york
he met me
outside his building on a saturday
invited me up to his office
saw the labs
i'm there in front of him he did
something really cool he reached back
didn't even look grabbed a book off the
shelf it was one of his books
i thought that was the baddest that was
a badass thing don't even have to look
that's one of my books yep okay here and
he signed it to me neil texas future
astronomers signed carl but that's not
that's only the half of it
later in the day i'm ready to go back to
new york it begins to snow as it does
often in december in isaika and he says
here's my home number
if the bus can't get through from the
snow spend the night with my family and
go back tomorrow i'm thinking who am i
why why
i'm nobody
but i was somebody to him
and i said to myself if i'm ever as
remotely famous as he is i will treat
students the way he has treated me
so
why did i go down that path oh because i
had that memory
and i said to myself
if we can fold this memory into this
this next cosmos
then we have a way
to justify who and what i am as the next
host because a torch got passed
it wasn't passed in 2014 it was passed
in 1975
all right
to neil tyson future astronomer i still
have that book
so i thought to myself i
possibly
could bring a unique contribution as
host to the show and that's what i did
so my visibility is primarily because
things that i think i can contribute
uniquely
or that people request
and it would help
enhance their lives i think we have to
talk about purpose a little bit and you
have such an interesting take on purpose
i get asked a lot you know what's the
purpose of life or what's meaning and
all that tell people your take on
purpose
purpose i i consider purpose and meaning
equivalent in this answer maybe there's
a way to divide them but let me
treat them as the same for the moment um
i
that many people
look for meaning
in life
as though
they will you know i'm still searching
for meaning and what my life as though
it's going to be under a rock
or behind a tree oh there's my meaning
and i'm thinking to myself
you have more power than that
you have the power to create meaning
in your life
rather than passively look for it
so for me
i create the meaning
and meaning to me is do i know more
about the world today than i did
yesterday
that enhances meaning for me
and if that accumulates
and accrues daily
in a month you you know way more than
you did than just that day later so that
you continue to grow
uh have i
by whatever powers i have available to
me
have i
lessened the suffering of others
or the corollary to that would be have i
enhanced the life of others they're
related
and i don't mean have i devoted the
whole day to doing that then i would be
ignoring myself but if there's some
small gesture that i can do that can
completely
add value to someone's life i'm going to
do it
because the leveraging
of 10 minutes of my life into the
happiness or enlightenment or the
reduced suffering of someone else i'd be
irresponsible
if i did not
how did you develop that as like a
guiding value where did that come from
no one ever told me
that i had to search for meaning in life
to begin with
so that was never even a part of me
it was i got my life this is who and
what i am
this is what i did in school these are
my dreams ambitions
how do i create meaning in my life as i
go forward my first question of me
wasn't where do i find meaning it was
how do i create meaning and that started
early early teens
did you help your kids with this is that
something that you found a way to sort
of educate on or pass down so that they
would be asking a similar question
instead of doing the sort of wander
search thing yeah i have an unorthodox
approach to what we did with our kids my
wife has
it was all legal
my wife has a
phd in mathematical physics so people
always ask us
are your kids up you know
something you know they always ask you
right because to them scientists are
like always doing experiments but um
we discussed this my wife and i and i i
wanted to make sure that in however they
were raised that they retained
the curiosity of childhood
into adulthood man how do you do that
well it's that implies that you have to
do a lot of work
to
make it happen when in fact
you'd be surprised how much work you put
in to squash it
okay let's say there's a little toddler
walking here okay crawling on the ground
it comes up and they start grabbing this
what's the first thing no don't touch
that
okay
this was an experiment waiting to happen
that you just squashed this is a cup it
has water in it okay this is breakable
the kid doesn't know that they want to
experiment so they'll grab it it'll fall
it'll break water will spill all over
that was an experiment you just
prevented
so you would let your kids wander over
yes and the kids make a complete mess of
the house you don't have kids
with the intent of retaining a clean
house these are non-commensurate goals
okay kids are sources of chaos and and
disorder
get over that fact and where does the
disorder come from it's because they are
experimenting with their environment
everything is new to them
everything
and
i was this is an obscure example but i i
was in central park we were just
finished seeing one of the shakespeare
in the park performances and it rained a
little earlier so there were puddles in
some of the walkways i saw a woman
walking with her kid the kid has
galoshes on and a raincoat on and
they're coming down the walkway
and there's this big juicy muddy puddle
right there
and
i said
please let the kid jump in the puddle
you know the kid wants to jump in the
puddle the kid is like three or four you
know the kid and what is what does the
mother do
you pulls the kid around to prevent that
from happening that's an experiment in
cratering that's what craters happen
that way you splash the water there's
mud it's fun you get to see the cause
and effect
of a force downward force operating on a
on a fluid
gone
that was a bit of curiosity in that
moment that was extinguished
so with our kids
curiosity provided it does not kill them
if it meant we had extra work
in front of us
i would do that extra work so
your task
is less
to
instill curiosity in your kids than it
is to
make sure you don't squash what's
already there
and i have pretty high confidence that
they'll retain that curiosity through
the turbulent middle school years into
high school and what is an adult
scientist but a kid who's never lost the
curiosity
and so
in here
people ask about raising their kids they
ask about education and one day i'm
going to have an education book
one day
but but i'm not ready for that because
i'm still
baking these ideas
and
i can tell you this if if we're if
einstein were here and we're talking
with einstein
we could talk him for hours and hours
and hours you know what question will
never come out of our mouths is what
college did you go to i want to go to
that same college
i bet most of your people have sat in
this chair it's not about what college
they went to it's about their own
initiative their own drive their own
ambitions their own curiosity
that is not taught in school
sadly
school they view you as this empty
vessel that they pour information in and
you test it over here you get a high
grade you're praised
you might even give the commencement
speech
is that who become the shakers and
movers of the world
i don't think so there'll be some of
them but not with the not with the
totality of expectation that is brought
upon those who who who who succeed in
school in that way so i can just tell
you that what has to change
in schools and i don't have a recipe yet
i just know the result what the result
has to be it has to be when you come
down the steps on the last day of school
you are not singing the alice cooper
song school's out forever
you'll be there'll be a sad song you'll
be singing saying gee
i gotta go two or three months without
learning anything you should be sad that
school is over not happy
and the fact that you're happy that
school is over means something is not
working in there you're not enjoying the
learning process
and on the other side of that is school
should as a minimum
preserve that curiosity
for you
it yeah if you lost some of it because
it's not going to be in all of us put it
back in
so that when you graduate school
you can give literal meaning to the word
commencement
commencement means beginning
it doesn't mean ending
and so you leave school and you say to
yourself i now know how to learn
i now have a curiosity of all things i
have yet to be exposed to
and i will now become a lifelong learner
without that
you become ossified in whatever was the
body of knowledge that existed the day
you graduated
and you will lead a life always looking
back at that time without continuing to
grow who and what you can become in life
i think we should all get as high grades
as you can but if you don't get the
highest grades possible
no one should be standing in judgment of
that
if you have some other ambitions that
have pathways that don't get encoded in
the gpa that other people are
referencing that's all i'm saying and
you said the goal of school is to
hopefully commencement you know how to
learn when you approach a topic that you
don't know well how what is your actual
process
great question so
i'm going to give a slightly longer
answer than you bargained for it just
because it's all for you because it's
got good flesh on it
i'm a scientist
raised catholic
but started drifting when i was like in
third grade none of it was making much
sense to me
and so
not only that my household
though we went to church it was a
secular household there were no
decisions made in the house that
referenced the bible or god or jesus or
anything
so
in that sense decision making was
secular and rationally informed
and i thank my parents for that and
actually a testimony to them in this
book
um i i
just thanked them for their just their
rational
approach to everything it
it i valued that as someone being raised
by them because it meant
if something didn't make sense they'd do
it because i said so that's not a
rational reply to your child they would
have the reason for it and we'd discuss
the reasons
so
early on as i became more visible i'd
get letters and people would ask
about god
and i don't know much about god you know
so i my early letters were well sciences
religion is that and that i can't help
you any further then i thought to myself
that's not fair to the person who wrote
the question
they're coming from a place
some religious tradition whatever that
tradition is
and i if i'm receiving that letter
there's a contract an implicit contract
between
me and the person who's seeking my
guidance
my wisdom
my insights
and i owe it to that person to know as
much as possible as i can
about where they're coming from
so i said i i should really read up on
this so i started buying bibles
okay
i bought the torah i bought the new
testament the old testament i bought the
mormon testament i bought the koran and
different translations and i started
reading them and i studied the rituals
how the rituals differ
how who celebrates what holidays and the
jehovah's witness don't celebrate
christmas last i checked okay they have
a different interpretation and
understanding of the same passages that
other people say it's time to celebrate
christmas that's interesting to me
because people raised in different
traditions and different
belief systems
at different times they are writing to
me
so i have shelves upon shells
of religious tracts
i have shelves upon two shells of ufo
material
okay people i saw ufo what was it i
think it's an alien let me find out
where these people come from what
literature have they been exposed to
what are they thinking what is their
belief system conspiracy theorists so i
have shelves on all this stuff and
usually you go to someone's house and
you find books that completely align
with their world views
all right someone asked me that somebody
said what what are the books on your
shelves right now and i and i made i
gave them the list
and they said
wait a minute do you believe in that
stuff
and i said i read things
that take me to places where other
people think
if i'm an educator i want to know that
because when you're speaking to me and i
have some understanding of you
i i can navigate we talk about
navigation earlier i can navigate your
receptors for learning
i don't have to have you come to where i
am that's not right i'm the educator not
you
you're the curious person
so i'm gonna meet you on your territory
and i had to read all of that to do so
just
to be
genuine and honest in my replies to
people
in this book one of what took me a year
to answer one of the questions it was a
jewish woman orthodox why do i know
she's orthodox i didn't have the
latitude to ask her because it's just a
letter i know she's orthodox because she
doesn't spell god
is g dash d
so i know above certain thresholds you
don't even utter the name god that's so
that's a level of piety that i got that
she's jewish she's got a 10 year old son
she's sending him to hebrew school
so that he can learn this is i'm quoting
her so she can learn where he comes from
and learn his traditions
oh by the way he's on the autism
spectrum
so this is building right okay she's
orthodox she's really religious she's
got a 10 year old son going to hebrew
school he's on the autism spectrum and
he says by the way one day he came home
and said he doesn't believe in god
he thinks bible stories can't possibly
be true and she asks him
how did you come to think this
and he said
cosmos
it's like okay so i'm in deep now
okay
should i read further where is this
gonna go this can only end badly i'm
saying to myself and it turned out she
was very open
she said you know
i don't want to make him believe things
that might not be true he respects you
i know that and i thank you for that
but sometimes i have my doubts too about
these stories in the bible
so i just don't know you know can
science and god co-exist
and
i just want to be a good parent
it was like whoa
okay
so i went back and brushed up on
sort of jewish rituals and and it took
me a year just to get all the right
words on the page so i wrote back
i think it's my finest letter in the
book so you can ask well so how did it
all resolve
so my only thought i'll tell you is
was a year and a half later or so
she
wrote to me
and invited me to his bar mitzvah
so i said okay i i think that that
worked out that that worked out good
so
you said how do i prepare what was the
essence of your how do i learn i learned
because i want to be better
at what it is i'm doing than i am it
sounds like it starts with books it's
reading disconfirming evidence that i
think is super powerful yes
let me point at you please
i'll take it it was like yes
i tried and one of my highest
compliments i got one day
i'm this is earlier when i was sort of
sort of recognizable to people people
would say i think i know who you are but
they're not quite sure
i was in a cvs
and i'm waiting in line and they're the
magazines that are there the impulse
magazines right
and one of them was life magazine
and it was this was around easter right
and it was like jesus
um
what different cultures say about him
is it hispanic french german whatever
so i looked at it
and i said that could be interesting let
me so i pick that up and i add it to the
stash
only when i did that
did a person in another aisle come up to
me and say
you're neil degrasse tyson aren't you
and i said yes
and he said i would i wasn't sure
until i saw you pick up the magazine on
jesus
because i know you
read everything
and i said wow
this guy really knows who i am so yes
you said the right disconfirming books
yes yeah i think that's really powerful
if you were going to give people one
topic that they should study that would
be sort of the most eye-opening and
useful in their lives that dealt with
the cosmos what would it be
yeah i'm going to give you a cop-out
answer for that and i'm going to say
i want you to
learn
what science is
and how and why it works
where would you send people for that is
there a particular book a website one of
your books
yeah i kind of did that a lot in my
books
i'm just saying
uh one of my books
which did very well
not as well as the the most recent one
it's called death by black hole
that book
is the sum of my pedagogical insights
into connecting you
who might otherwise be disconnected to
science
and putting you in the middle of what
science is
how and why it works
what it means when we say we know
something what it means when we say we
don't know something
and in spite of the morbid title it's
really about
science as an enterprise
and
one of the sections is called the nature
of knowing
and another section called the knowing
of nature right there's there are
philosophical dimensions to it where you
will come out of that book that's my
goal you'll come out of it saying
the world looks different to me now
because i see all the way science has
reached in
and has enlightened
civilization to enhance our health our
wealth our security
in this place we call nature
where's the best place for people to
connect with you we've got a lot of
amazing stuff oh well i'm upping my
presence on instagram your instagram
feed is rad dude well no but it's
there's not many postings there you
could do more i won't lie
they are awesome okay so what i started
my instagram because i i have i had
spent a period of time in my life where
i did a lot of photography
as art
art projects i i'm deeply sensitive to
her my brother is a professional artist
so i grew up just he went to the high
school of music and art so i just grew
up as the nerd scientist but exposed to
art
and so i liked photography so my
initially my instagram was i think how
many instagram accounts were they were
just places to put beautiful photos but
lately they've come
they've instagram has become a platform
for communicating
so i'm i i think i'm going to ramp that
up a bit
and it is good
all right my last question what's the
impact you want to have on the world
i don't seek impact um i
okay
my impact would be
people
learn
from me
in a way that they are empowered
by what i taught them
so that when they think of what they
learned from me they no longer think of
me
they think of their own
base of understanding of how this world
works
and so that
i become irrelevant
from that um exercise
and because if people say this is true
because tyson said so then i failed
that's not how you teach someone
that's that's teaching them by authority
i don't you know that's no
i want to i want to teach you how to
think about the world and then you say i
have a new way to understand the world
and you just run off don't you don't
even look back
because a new
level of hunger has descended upon you
and methods and tools to feed that
hunger are now accessible to you so my
impact would be
that
others are impacted
and
they don't even remember that i had
something to do with it
on my tombstone
i want the epitaph
be ashamed to die
until you have scored some victory for
humanity oh
that's horus man
i can get behind that and a victory for
humanity
it's not a victory for yourself it's not
statues it's not your name it's just
humanity's better off
you want the world to be any of us i
think should want the world to be
a little better off for you having lived
in it
that doesn't mean people praising you
that that's no
not even about that
so what do you have to give
with no expectation of return
back to duty i get it that's what it is
it's beautiful man yeah
guys there are some people that get
famous on hype and there are some people
that get famous on substance i'm telling
you right now this man has gotten where
he's gotten on substance it is
incredible dive into his world you will
not regret it follow his instagram
account it's absolutely incredible read
all of his books i can vouch for several
of them and they are amazing if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care
neil degrasse tyson in the house
thank you dude
with all these equations there was that
pot of gold out there i wanted to
understand einstein i wanted to
understand the quantum theory i wanted
to be the cutting edge of science even
if it meant that i had to sit in my
chair and simply crank out the math
you got to pay your dues